tini - download tracklogs from Brauniger and Flytec flight recorders
Copyright (C) 2007-2008 Tom Payne



INTRODUCTION

tini is simple program for downloading tracklogs from Flytec and Brauniger
flight recorders.  Its goal is to be simple, functional and portable with no
external dependencies.

The following flight recorders (FRs) are supported:
    Brauniger Compeo
    Brauniger Compeo+
    Brauniger Competino
    Brauniger Competino+
    Brauniger Galileo
    Flytec 5020
    FLytec 5030
    Flytec 6020
    FLytec 6030



QUICK START

Type "make" to build the software and "make install" (as root) to install it.

To download all the tracks from your FR into the current directory, run:
	$ tini
If this doesn't work then check the "TROUBLESHOOTING" section below.

By default, tini assumes that your FR is attached to /dev/ttyS0.  You can
specify a different device using the -d option, for example:
	$ tini -d /dev/ttyUSB0
USB-to-serial converters and the Compeo+/6030 often appear as /dev/ttyUSB0 or
/dev/tts/USB0.  To avoid typing this every time you can set the TINI_DEVICE
environment variable to point to the device.  For example (in bash):
	$ export TINI_DEVICE=/dev/ttyUSB0

You can also set the default device at compile time.  See "ADVANCED USAGE"
below.

For a full list of available commands and options, run:
	$ tini -h



COMMANDS

The default command is download.

do, download [LIST] ...
	This command will download all new tracklogs from the device to the
	current directory.  It will not overwrite any existing files unless
	you specify the -o (--overwrite) option.  You can specify a list of
	tracklogs to download with the optional LIST argument(s) which is a
	comma-separated list of tracklog numbers or ranges like 1,3-4,6-.  For
	example, to download only the most recent flight, run:
		tini download 1

li, list
	This command lists all the tracklogs stored in the device.  The output
	is in YAML format.

id
	This command prints the instrument identifier, pilot name, serial
	number and software version to the standard output in YAML format.

ig, igc
	This command prints the IGC file of the currently selected flight on
	the FR to the standard output.  You must first select a flight on the
	FR, otherwise there will be no output.  From the main screen hold down
	Menu / F2 until the "Main Setup Menu" appears.  Select "Flight
	Memory", use the up and down arrow keys to choose a flight, and press
	Enter to select it.



OPTIONS

-h, --help
	Print a brief summary of options and commands and quit.

-D, --directory=DIRECTORY
	Download tracklogs to this directory.

-d, --device=DEVICE
	Set the serial port device.

-o, --overwrite
	Re-download and overwrite existing IGC files.  This option can be
	dangerous. Make sure that you understand the BUGS section below before
	using it.

-q, --quiet
	Do not print status messages to stderr.

-m, --manufacturer=STRING
	Override the manufacturer.  Default is FLY for Flytec devices and BRA
	for Brauniger devices.  Use --manufacturer=XXX to generate fully IGC-
	compliant filenames.

-s, --short-filenames
	Generate IGC files using the short file name style (YMDCXXXF.IGC).

-l, --log=FILENAME
	Log all communication with the device to FILENAME (use "-" for the
	standard output).  This is useful for troubleshooting or if you're
	curious about what happens behind the scenes.



TROUBLESHOOTING

If tini doesn't work then please ensure that you are doing the following in
exactly this order:

1. Switch on the FR.

2. On the FR, go to the "Main Setup Menu" (hold down Menu).

3. Optionally, if you want to use the "igc" command then select the flight you
want to download by choosing "Flight Memory" from the "Main Setup Menu", using
the up and down arrow keys to choose the flight and pressing Enter to display
its summary.

4. Plug the serial cable into the FR and the computer.

5. Check that the device is correct (typically /dev/ttyS0 is the first serial
port, /dev/ttyS1 is the second serial port, and /dev/ttyUSB0 or /dev/tts/USB0
is the USB-to-serial converter or Compeo+/6030).

6. Check that you (as a user) has permission to access the device you
identified in step 5.  If you get "Permission denied" errors then you do not
have permission and will have to check your distribution's documentation or
ask your friendly Linux expert to find out how to grant it to yourself.
Alternatively you can follow the instructions in "ADVANCED USAGE" below.  As a
workaround you can run tini as root but this is not recommended.

7. Finally, run tini:
	$ tini -d DEVICE
where DEVICE is the device that you identified in step 5.  If you still have
problems then wait one minute and try again (sometimes the FR can still be
transmitting data in response to a previously interrupted command), or try
using specifying "-l-" on the command line which shows all communication
between tini and your FR on the standard output.



ADVANCED USAGE

You can set the default device at compile tile by setting the DEVICE variable
in make.  For example to set the default device to /dev/ttyUSB0 use:
	make DEVICE=/dev/ttyUSB0

If, instead of granting permissions to users to access the serial ports, you
can grant access to the tini program instead.  Typically the serial port
devices are readable/writeable by the uucp group:
	$ ls -l /dev/ttyS*
	crw-rw---- 1 root uucp 4, 64 2007-04-25 20:04 /dev/ttyS0
	...
You can set the group sticky bit on the tini program make it always run as
this group.  To do this, run (as root):
	# make setgidinstall
You can override the default serial port device with the DEVICE variable,
e.g.:
	# make DEVICE=/dev/ttyUSB0 setgidinstall



BUGS

The IGC filenames are generated according to the IGC specification.  The IGC
filename includes the date and the flight number on that date.  In special
circumstances tini will generate the same filename for different flights which
will lead to either the first flight being overwritten and lost or the second
flight not being downloaded and consequently lost.  This will happen only if
ALL of the following are true:
1. You record a tracklog during a UTC day.
2. You download it with tini.
3. You delete it from your FR.
4. You record another tracklog on the same UTC day.
5. You attempt to download the new tracklog with tini.
There are two workarounds:
1. Only download your flights at the end of the UTC day, for European users
this is easy since the UTC day corresponds closely to the actual day.
2. Don't delete tracklogs from your FR from the current UTC day.  Basically,
European users should not be affected unless they make several flights a day,
download them at lunchtime and delete them immediately after downloading.
American, Asian and Australian users need to be a bit more careful!

To fix this bug in software, tini would have to match tracklogs downloaded
already with those currently on the FR to determine whether each had been
downloaded and its correct filename.  This possibly involves moving and
renaming existing tracklogs.  Although not impossible, it is tricky to get
right and therefore in the interest of simplicity this feature has not been
implemented in this version.



AUTHOR

Tom Payne <twpayne@gmail.com>



LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin
St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA

# vim: set spell spelllang=en textwidth=78:
